Clara Maine Bachelor Thesis Repository
=====================================

This repository is a modified and extended version of the T-RECS (Tool for RecSys Simulation) library, originally developed by Eli Lucherini, Matthew Sun, and Amy Winecoff. The extended version facilitates and tests the impact of **user-directed preference shift** within recommender systems and was developed between March and June 2022 by Clara Maine for her Bachelor's thesis at Radboud University.

Instructions for installing and runnning the basic t-recs build can be found in t-recs-installation-README.rst. 
To reproduce the experiments from this thesis, this repository can be cloned and this extended library can be used locally. The main file for running the experiments and generating the plots can be found in `algoconfounding/creator_sim.py` and  `algocounfounding/fixed_sim.py`.

The final thesis, providing an in-depth motivation, explanation, and analysis of these results can be found in `Clara_Maine_BSc_AI_Thesis_FINAL.pdf`. The abstract is provided below:

*In this thesis we reviewed the problem of recommender system-induced preference change and presented user-directed preference change as a solution. We argue that a reliance on behavior to infer user preferences can lead to gaps and problems in the kind of preference change they tend to invoke in users. User-directed preference change is a bottom-up approach which better supports users to be in-the-loop of their own preference change. In order to test the system-wide effects of user-directed preference change, we performed a simulation study to model the effect of a novel “meta-preference” mechanism by which users can provide corrective feedback to better align recommended content with their preference change goals. Using the TRECS simulation tool, we formalized user meta-preferences and present a simple mechanism by which they were incorporated into the predicted user preferences of simulated content-based recommender systems. In measuring the degree and alignment of these changed preferences, we confirmed that our mechanism was effective in causing user-directed preference change within the simulation. We noted a trade-off with accuracy and found strong homogenizing effects on recommendations and preferences throughout the simulation. Though we believe that user-directed preference change is an important consideration, we do not consider it to be a complete solution to the preference change problem given its myopic focus on individual satisfaction. Rather, this thesis explores one of many possible mechanisms which are important in the development of technology which can be symbiotically beneficial for individuals and society.*
